Unleashing Multi-Hop Reasoning Potential in Large Language Models
through Repetition of Misordered Context
Sangwon Yu1
Saehyung Lee1
1

Ik-hwan Kim1
Junsung Park1

Jongyoon Song1
Sungroh Yoon1,2 *

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
AIIS, ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and IPAI, Seoul National University
{dbtkddnjs96, 12kimih, coms1580, halo8218, jerryray, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Question: What award did the author of The Red Tree receive?
Document [0] (Title: Passion Pictures) Passion Australia produced "The
Lost Thing", directed by Andrew Ruhemann and Shaun Tan, which
won an Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 2011.

Multi-hop reasoning, which requires multi-step
reasoning based on the supporting documents
within a given context, remains challenging
for large language models (LLMs). LLMs often struggle to filter out irrelevant documents
within the context, and their performance is
sensitive to the absolute position of supporting
documents within that context. In this paper, we
identify an additional challenge: LLMs’ performance is also sensitive to the order, relative
position, in which the supporting documents
are presented. We refer to this as the misordered context problem. To address this issue,
based on the theoretical approach, we propose
a simple yet effective method called context
repetition (CoRe), which involves prompting
the model by repeatedly presenting the context.
This ensures that certain contiguous reasoning
segments within supporting documents are presented in the optimal order, effectively guiding the model’s reasoning in the appropriate
direction. Applying CoRe, we improve the F1
score by up to 30%p on multi-hop QA tasks
and increase accuracy by up to 70%p on a synthetic task. Additionally, CoRe helps mitigate
the well-known “lost-in-the-middle” problem
in LLMs and can be effectively combined with
retrieval-based approaches utilizing Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning.

1

Document [1] (Title: The Red Tree (Shaun Tan)) The Red Tree (2001),
written and illustrated by Shaun Tan, is a picture book that presents a
fragmented journey through a dark world.
The answer is not mentioned in the documents

< Same documents with misleading order >
Document [0] (Title: The Red Tree (Shaun Tan)) The Red Tree (2001),
written and illustrated by Shaun Tan, is a picture book that presents a
fragmented journey through a dark world.
Document [1] (Title: Passion Pictures) Passion Australia produced "The
Lost Thing", directed by Andrew Ruhemann and Shaun Tan, which
won an Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 2011.

Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film

< Same documents with proper order >

Figure 1: An example of the misordered context problem in multi-hop reasoning of large language models,
sampled from the MuSiQue dataset. Model performance
is sensitive to the order of given documents.

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023)
are capable of performing various complex natural
language processing tasks due to their emergent
abilities in in-context learning, instruction following, and step-by-step reasoning (Wei et al., 2022;
Kojima et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023). However,
multi-hop reasoning still remains a challenging task
* Corresponding author

for LLMs. In this task, multiple external source
documents related to the given query are provided
as context, and the model searches for useful supporting documents within this context to find the
answer. The model derives an answer through multiple steps of reasoning based on these supporting
documents (Mavi et al., 2024).
During this process, the model faces several challenges in terms of grounding to the context (Gao
et al., 2023). First, the model struggles to filter
out noisy documents that are irrelevant to the correct answer (Shi et al., 2023). In practice, noisy
documents can significantly degrade the reasoning performance of LLMs (Cuconasu et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2024). Additionally, LLMs are highly
sensitive to the absolute position of supporting documents within the context. Specifically, when a
document is positioned in the middle of the con-

6450
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2025, pages 6450–6470
April 29 - May 4, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

text, the model may fail to recognize it properly,
resulting in a “lost-in-the-middle” problem (Liu
et al., 2023). These issues become more critical
as the maximum length of the context grows and
the number of retrieved documents increases (Lee
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024).
In this study, we address additional context
grounding problems related to multi-hop reasoning
that have not been deeply discussed so far. In a
multi-hop reasoning task, there are multiple supporting documents, and the model derives the answer by considering each document through stepby-step reasoning. Due to the nature of the decoderonly structure, which performs causal attention,
LLMs can only perceive documents in a left-toright order. If this order is presented unfavorably
for the model’s reasoning, the model’s performance
may be significantly degraded. Following this rationale, we observe that, even in ideal situations without noisy documents, LLMs exhibit up to a 26%p
difference in F1 score depending on the order, relative position, of supporting documents. Since there
is no guarantee that supporting documents will be
presented to the model in the appropriate order
for the model reasoning during actual tasks, it is
inevitable that this problem arises. We call it the
misordered context problem. Figure 1 shows an
example of the misordered context problem.
To address the problem, we approach it from
the perspective of context augmentation. We aim
to construct the augmented context that presents
the supporting documents in a more appropriate
order than the original context. Through theoretical
analysis, we demonstrate that by repeating the context containing k supporting documents k times,
all possible orders of presenting the documents
can be covered. That is, the k-repeated context can
always present the supporting documents to the
model in the optimal order. In real-world scenarios,
however, the value of k for a given context is unknown. Furthermore, repeating the context leads to
an increase in inference time costs. Based on this
theoretical analysis and its identified limitations,
we propose the context repetition (CoRe) method:
the given context is repeated k̂ times in which k̂ is
the predetermined hyperparameter. This practical
approach ensures that all k̂-contiguous reasoning
chains within supporting documents are presented
in the optimal order, guiding LLM’s reasoning in a
more coherent and structured manner.
To evaluate CoRe, we conduct experiments on
3 multi-hop QA benchmarks—HotpotQA (Yang

et al., 2018), 2WikiMultihopQA (Ho et al., 2020),
and MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022)—as well as
an additional synthetic task. In the synthetic task,
the model is required to search for elements in
lists composed of non-negative integer elements,
based on context where information is presented
in a reverse order. In the evaluation, CoRe significantly improves multi-hop QA task performance
across various LLMs. For example, in the 2WikiMultihopQA task using the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
model, we observe up to 30%p improvement in
F1 score, and in the synthetic task, we observe
up to a 70%p improvement in accuracy. Through
in-depth empirical analysis, we demonstrate that
CoRe provides performance benefits to the model
by improving order-related reasoning. Additionally,
we show that CoRe alleviates the previously known
“lost-in-the-middle” problem and can be effectively
combined with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) methods
in retrieval-augmented tasks.
In summary, our work (1) introduces the misordered context problem, a critical challenge for
LLMs in multi-hop reasoning, (2) theoretically proposes context augmentation as a solution to this
issue, which forms the foundation of our practical and effective CoRe method, and (3) demonstrates that CoRe significantly enhances model performance across various tasks and effectively mitigates the misordered context problem.

2

Related Work

The process of modeling the multi-step reasoning
required in a multi-hop QA task typically involves
methods that decompose the query step-by-step to
predict the answer (Min et al., 2019; Yadav et al.,
2019; Malon and Bai, 2020). From the perspective of utilizing LLMs, methods have been proposed that combine with CoT techniques, allowing
the model to self-generate subsequent questions
and predict intermediate answers while performing
multi-step reasoning (Yao et al., 2023; Khot et al.,
2022; Lazaridou et al., 2022; Press et al., 2023;
Jiang et al., 2023b; Xu et al., 2024). However, these
methods often involve complex processes where errors propagate and accumulate. To reduce this complexity, we aim to enhance LLMs’ innate multi-hop
reasoning capabilities.
In retrieval-augmented generation (Lewis et al.,
2020; Izacard et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024a), the
typical approach for multi-hop QA is to retrieve
documents related to the query, and have the LLM

6451

Figure 2: Evaluation results of F1 score for each query type in MuSiQue with permuted clean contexts.

reason based on this context in a "retrieve-andreason" fashion. A key issue here is handling the
noise introduced by irrelevant documents within
the context. To address this, methods have been
proposed to help the model correctly locate the evidence within the context (Shi et al., 2024b; Kim
et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024). With
the recent increase in the LLMs’ context length,
Ziyan Jiang (2024) have also explored including
more documents and leveraging the LLM’s reasoning capabilities. We aim to propose a method
focusing on document order to enable the LLM to
reason correctly within the context.
From the perspective of repetition in LLMs,
Springer et al. (2024) demonstrate that by repeating
sentences during the sentence embedding extraction process, it is possible to compute embeddings
that encode bidirectional context even in unidirectional LMs. Xu et al. (2023) show that in arithmetic reasoning tasks, repeating the query can improve performance by leveraging bidirectional understanding. While these methods are similar to
ours in that they employ repetition, we differ fundamentally in that we focus on the issue of document
order in multi-hop reasoning rather than on simple
bidirectional understanding.
From the perspective of context sensitivity in
LLMs, recent works focus on addressing the issue
of absolute positional bias in tasks where LLMs
are required to choose between multiple options
(Pezeshkpour and Hruschka, 2024; Zheng et al.,
2024). Also, Liu et al. (2023) also address the issue
of absolute positional bias, specifically the "lost
in the middle" problem. This problem pertains to
the model’s difficulty in effectively recognizing
information that appears in the middle positions
of the context provided to the LLM. This absolute positional bias issue differs from the ordering
problem we address in our work, which involves ensuring that LLMs interpret supporting documents

within the context in the correct reasoning chain
order, relative position, in the multi-hop reasoning task. Chen et al. (2024) analyze the sensitivity
of reasoning performance in LLMs to the order
in which rules or premises are presented during
logical and mathematical reasoning. Our work investigates longer-context scenarios and addresses a
broader spectrum of multi-hop reasoning tasks, including open-domain question answering and synthetic tasks, where document-level ordering issues
are more pronounced. Furthermore, we propose
a concrete methodology to mitigate order-related
challenges, enhancing the novelty of our approach
in addressing this problem.

3

CoRe: Context Augmentation for
Misordered Supporting Documents

In this section, we empirically demonstrate that
the performance of LLMs in multi-hop reasoning
is sensitive to the order of supporting documents
within the context. We refer to this phenomenon
as the misordered context problem. We theoretically formalize this problem from the perspective
of context structure. Building on the formalization
and considering its practical limitation, we propose
context repetition (CoRe). This method enables
LLMs to interpret specific contiguous reasoning
segments in an optimal order, facilitating more effective multi-hop reasoning within a given context.
3.1

Problem of misordered Context in
Multi-Hop Reasoning

We begin by addressing the following research
question: Is the performance of LLMs on multi-hop
reasoning tasks sensitive to the order of supporting documents within the context? To explore this
question, we conduct an empirical study in the context of the multi-hop QA task using the MuSiQue
dataset. The dataset consists of samples categorized
into 3 types: 2-hop, 3-hop, and 4-hop. For a given

6452

k-hop sample, there are k supporting documents
and several noisy documents that distract from the
correct answer. To isolate the effect of supporting
document order, we remove the noisy documents
and construct clean contexts solely from the supporting documents for our experiments.
For each k-hop query, we permute the order of
the k supporting documents in every possible way,
resulting in a total of k! different contexts. We then
evaluate the model’s response to each of these contexts. In other words, for each k-hop query, the
model generates a total of k! answers, and we assess these answers using the F1 score. We categorize the evaluation results based on the types of
order of the documents within contexts associated
with each query. The type is determined by the conditional probability of the correct answer a for the
model θ, pθ (a | Q, C, I) where Q is the query, C
is the context in the specific order of the supporting
documents, and I is the instruction for question
answering. The higher the probability, the more
optimally the supporting documents are ordered
within the context for the answering of the model.
We evaluate the model’s performance across the
best-case (highest probability), the worst-case (lowest probability), and the mean performance across
all possible contexts for each query.
Figure 2 presents the results of an empirical
study on 2-hop, 3-hop, and 4-hop reasoning samples. For each k-hop type, we randomly sample
200 samples from the validation set for evaluation. We evaluate 4 different LLMs: Llama-3.1-8BInstruct (Dubey et al., 2024), Mistral-7B-Instructv0.3 (Jiang et al., 2023a), Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
(Team, 2024), and Phi-3.5-mini-instruct (Abdin
et al., 2024). Across all models, the performance
gap between the best and worst cases is consistently
pronounced, with at least 10 points in terms of F1
score. As the number of hops increases, indicating
more complex reasoning types, the performance
variation grows, reaching up to 26 points in terms
of F1 score. Given that the context in this study
consists solely of supporting documents, the performance disparity is expected to widen further
in real-world tasks where noisy documents are included in the context.
Based on these findings, we demonstrate the answer to the research question: the multi-hop reasoning performance of LLMs is indeed significantly
sensitive to the order in which supporting documents are presented. This also aligns with the rationale that decoder-only LLMs, operating with

causal attention, interpret the context in a fixed
left-to-right order. In real-world scenarios, common prompting methods such as retrieval or searchbased approaches do not guarantee that supporting
documents will be presented to the model in an
optimal order. Consequently, the model is often
exposed to a misordered context that is disadvantageous for reasoning, leading to degraded performance. We term this issue the misordered context
problem, and in the following sections, we describe
our approach to addressing this problem.
3.2

Context Augmentation Approach

For the misordered context problem, we formalize
a solution from the perspective of context manipulation. We consider a k-hop reasoning scenario,
where the model must derive an answer based on
a prompt consisting of a query Q, context C, and
instruction I. The context C is composed of k supporting documents as well as multiple noisy documents, structured as follows:
C = (n0 , d1 , n1 , · · · , dk , nk ),

(1)

where di is the i-th supporting document within
the context, and ni is an arbitrary number of noisy
documents located between supporting documents,
as well as at the beginning and the end of the context. At this point, we define an order σ for the
supporting documents as follows:
Definition 1. Let σ(·) be a permutation function
for (1, 2, · · · , k). Then, order σ is defined as
σ(d1 , d2 , · · · , dk ) ≜ (dσ(1) , dσ(2) , · · · , dσ(k) ).
Based on the definition of order, we define the
set of contexts that include supporting documents
in a specific order σ as follows:
Definition 2. Let σ be an order of supporting documents. Then, we define Cσ as the set of all contexts
that include the supporting documents in order σ:

Cσ ≜ C | C = (n0 , dσ(1) , n1 , · · · , dσ(k) , nk ),
∀n0 , n1 , · · · , nk } .

The order σ defined above can exist in a total
of k! different configurations, and thus there are
k! possible sets Cσ . The initially provided context
for answering the query belongs to some arbitrary
Cσ , and when σ is the optimal order, the model
is expected to perform at its best. We define the
optimal order σθ∗ for a specific model θ as follows:

6453

Context Repetition with Chat Template
Initial Context from User
Question: What award did the author of The Red Tree receive?

Sure. Before answering the question, I'll reconsider the
question and the documents once more.

Documents:

Question: What award did the author of The Red Tree receive?

Document [0] (Title: Passion Pictures) Passion Australia
produced "The Lost Thing", directed by Andrew Ruhemann and
Shaun Tan, which won an Academy Award for Best Animated
Short Film in 2011.

Documents:
Document [0] (Title: Passion Pictures) Passion Australia
produced "The Lost Thing", directed by Andrew Ruhemann and
Shaun Tan, which won an Academy Award for Best Animated
Short Film in 2011.

Document [1] (Title: The Red Tree (Shaun Tan)) The Red Tree
(2001), written and illustrated by Shaun Tan, is a picture book
that presents a fragmented journey through a dark world.

Document [1] (Title: The Red Tree (Shaun Tan)) The Red Tree
(2001), written and illustrated by Shaun Tan, is a picture book
that presents a fragmented journey through a dark world.

Answer the question based on the given documents.

Model Answer
Now answer the question based on the given documents.

Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film

Figure 3: Illustration of CoRe where the model understands the context with the optimal order of documents [1]
and [0]. Text with a white background is the prompt, and text with a yellow background is the model output.

Definition 3. Let θ be a model that performs multihop reasoning. Then, we define σθ∗ as the optimal
order of the given documents d for the model θ:
σθ∗ ≜ argmax E [pθ (a | Q, C, I)] .
σ

Theorem 1. For a given context C with its supporting documents ordered according to some permuta(k)
tion τ , the augmented context frep (C) belongs to
the set Cσ for any permutation σ. Formally,

C∈Cσ

(k)

That is, the optimal order of supporting documents for a given model is defined as the order that
maximizes the expected probability of generating
the correct answer in the presence of arbitrary noisy
documents. Based on the formalization so far, we
aim to find a function that maps a given context
C to another context C ′ , which has the supporting documents in the optimal order. The goal is to
increase the probability of the model generating
the correct answer. Therefore, we introduce an augmentation function f (·) that satisfies the following
conditions:
f (C) ∈ Cσθ∗ .

(2)

Now, we study the augmentation function discussed earlier. We define an augmentation function
(k)
frep (·) as follows:
(k)

(3)

k times

Here, C represents the given context, and ⊕ denotes the concatenation operation. Hence, the func(k)
tion frep (C) creates an augmented context by just
repeating the given context k times. Please note
that k = 1 indicates the absence of repetition. The
following theorem provides an important property
(k)
of frep (·) in relation to σ:

∀σ.

The proof of this theorem can be found in Appendix A. From Theorem 1, we can derive the following corollary:
(k)

Corollary 1.1. frep (C) always belongs to the set
of all contexts that present the supporting documents in the optimal order. Formally,
(k)

frep (C) ∈ Cσθ∗ .
(k)

Based on Corollary 1.1, we conclude that frep (·)
is an appropriate augmentation function that satisfies Eq. 2.
3.4

3.3 Context Repetition

frep (C) = C ⊕ C ⊕ · · · ⊕ C .
|
{z
}

frep (C) ∈ Cσ ,

Practical Approach

From the previous section 3.3, we can conclude
(k)
that frep (·) can serve as a methodology for mitigating the misordered context problem. However, for
direct application, the following two issues must
be addressed:
1. It is necessary to know the number of supporting
documents in the given context, k. (Issue 1)
2. The model should effectively handle the computational cost induced by the increased length
when the context is repeated k times. (Issue 2)
In real-world multi-hop reasoning scenarios, it is
not feasible to fully address issue 1. Additionally,
issue 2 becomes intractable as the number of documents included in the context grows, and more

6454

importantly, it incurs a significant additional cost
in terms of memory.
To overcome these critical limitations, we replace k with a predetermined hyperparameter k̂,
(k̂)

resulting the function frep (·) which can be con(k)
sidered an approximation of frep (·). This directly
addresses the issue 1 by constraining the unknown
value of k to predetermined k̂. While this approach
does not guarantee that all supporting documents
will be recognized in the optimal order, it ensures
that at least the k̂-contiguous reasoning chains
within supporting documents are interpreted in
the optimal order. This allows the LLM to perform multi-hop reasoning from the optimal starting
point, guiding the model to execute subsequent reasoning steps correctly. From the perspective of the
issue 2, the introduction of k̂ significantly reduces
the additional computational and memory costs,
bringing them to a manageable level.

of multiple documents, we combine the supporting documents with distracting (noisy) documents
assigned to each sample in the datasets. Detailed
statistics for each evaluation set are provided in
Appendix B. In the multi-hop QA evaluation, we
set the k̂ within the range of [1, 3] (k̂ = 1 means
the naive LLM baseline without repetition).
In addition to the multi-hop QA tasks, we evaluate model performance on an additional synthetic
task. Specifically, we provide the model information about a list that contains non-negative integers
as elements in a chained form consisting of two
consecutive elements. Afterward, we ask the model
for the first element of the list that contains a specific element. At this point, the specific element is
the last element of a list. For example, when there
are two lists with 3 elements each, the context and
question are structured as follows:
All the 2 lists described below
contain exactly 3 elements.
In the list 0, 381 is positioned
immediately before 512.
In the list 1, 7123 is positioned
immediately before 34.
In the list 0, 512 is positioned
immediately before 1021.
In the list 1, 34 is positioned
immediately before 6397.
Question: What is the first element
of the list that contains 1021?

(k̂)
Consequently, we propose to use frep (·) as a

method for solving the misordered context problem.
In other words, we introduce the context repetition
(CoRe) methodology, which repeatedly presents
the given context to guide the model recognize
the supporting documents in the appropriate order.
Figure 3 illustrates the detailed operation of our
methodology when k̂ = 2. In practice, we implement this method by utilizing a chat template to
ensure that the model naturally repeats the context
given by the user.

4

Experiments

In this section, we evaluate CoRe on multi-hop
QA tasks and a synthetic task that requires complex reasoning. In addition to the main experiments,
we conduct an analysis of the mechanism through
which CoRe achieves performance improvements
in the model.
4.1 Experimental Settings
We conduct experiments on three multi-hop QA
benchmarks: HotpotQA, 2WikiMultihopQA, and
MuSiQue. For HotpotQA and 2WikiMultihopQA,
reasoning-type annotations are provided for each
query. For these two datasets, we create evaluation sets by sampling an equal number of queries
from each reasoning type within the validation set.
In the case of MuSiQue, as described in Section
3.1, query types are categorized by the number of
hops. We use the entire validation set as the evaluation set for this dataset. To construct the context

Since the elements of each list are presented in
sequential order from the first to the last, the process of finding the list that contains the last element
and then searching for the first element of that list
must be performed in a right-to-left order. This
poses a challenge for models that typically process
context in a left-to-right order. Moreover, since this
type of task does not involve specific factual knowledge, it minimizes the interference of the model’s
pre-existing factual knowledge (Xiong et al., 2024).
Thus, these characteristics of the synthetic task enable us to establish an environment that clearly
exposes the model’s inherent misordered context
problem. We create a synthetic dataset consisting
of 1000 samples for the evaluation. Each sample
is composed of 10 lists, each containing 3 integers
between 0 and 9999 that do not overlap.
We conduct experiments using a total of five
models, including GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024),
in addition to the four LLMs used in section 3.1.
For Multi-hop QA tasks, we evaluate by measuring
the F1 score based on the short answers gener-

6455

Models
Llama-3.1-8B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe (k̂ = 3)
Mistral-7B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe (k̂ = 3)
Qwen2.5-7B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe (k̂ = 3)
Phi-3.5-mini
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe (k̂ = 3)
GPT-4o-mini
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe (k̂ = 3)

HotpotQA
Comparison Bridge
49.31
61.19
46.93
66.82
50.46
70.54
34.42
41.14
30.41
45.79
42.50
54.51
61.96
61.66
67.03
70.33
63.37
71.59
26.44
44.17
23.29
49.67
41.41
59.07
66.92
68.66
64.72
72.67
66.52
74.06

Compositional
38.10
48.15
50.74
18.82
27.78
38.93
41.36
54.20
54.13
27.70
37.64
40.62
51.96
57.43
56.72

2WikiMultihopQA
Comparison Inference Bridge-Comparison
55.77
40.75
34.86
58.13
44.81
65.11
62.58
47.44
68.18
32.90
29.77
15.43
35.67
36.39
29.09
42.91
38.67
28.70
65.47
37.26
39.45
70.30
42.40
64.54
69.64
44.30
68.00
45.26
27.00
35.19
50.92
32.34
36.71
46.91
33.76
22.98
76.63
43.84
60.96
79.14
52.03
66.96
79.84
51.09
68.84

2-hop
32.05
39.10
43.64
15.14
20.6
23.96
33.56
44.76
46.12
17.60
28.60
31.49
45.26
52.47
52.66

MuSiQue
3-hop 4-hop
26.24 27.06
38.23 34.08
41.02 36.08
10.31 11.00
15.74 12.36
20.17 14.78
34.87 37.49
43.10 45.08
42.84 45.88
16.80 12.67
26.31 26.59
26.83 32.40
42.04 40.04
49.47 42.53
49.37 42.89

Table 1: Main results of F1 score in the multi-hop QA tasks. All models are instruction-tuned LLMs.

Figure 4: Main results in the synthetic task. Repetition
step denotes the number of additional repetitions (k̂−1).

ated by the models. We evaluate synthetic tasks by
measuring accuracy based on whether the answers
generated by the models match the correct answers.
All prompts used in the experiments can be found
in the Appendix C.
4.2 Main Results
Table 1 shows the F1 scores of baseline models and
models with CoRe applied for multi-hop QA tasks.
Overall, performance improvements were observed
across all models and datasets. Notably, the performance appears to reach a plateau in the k̂ = 2 setting, where the context is repeated only once. Furthermore, we find additional performance improvements when further repetitions are applied (k̂ = 3).
In the case of HotpotQA, a significant performance
improvement was seen in the bridge type. This is
because answering bridge-type questions requires

reasoning across documents by linking information
between them, which is closely related to the order
of documents. For 2WikiMultihopQA, a considerable performance improvement was observed in
the bridge-comparison type, with Llama achieving
a 30-point improvement and Qwen achieving a 25point improvement in the F1 score. This is because
the bridge-comparison type is a complex 4-hop reasoning task that combines bridge and comparison
from HotpotQA. The MuSiQue dataset’s overall
performance improved regardless of the number of
hops. These results indicate that CoRe substantially
enhances the model’s multi-hop reasoning performance, particularly in tasks where the order of supporting documents is crucial, effectively guiding
the model along the correct reasoning paths.
We measure the accuracy of each model as we
increase the number of context repetitions up to 10
(k̂ = 11) in the synthetic task. As shown in Figure
4, we can see that the accuracy when no repetition is performed has a low value between 0% and
60%. This demonstrates that existing LLMs are unable to perform the synthetic task directly at once.
However, when CoRe is applied, we observe a significant performance improvement, with accuracy
increasing by at least 30% points and up to 70%
points. Additionally, we can see that many models
tend to improve performance as the number of repetitions increases. This suggests that the model leads
to the more appropriate order of reasoning chains
as repetition progresses multiple times. However,
for some models, particularly Qwen, there is a tendency for performance to drop again as the repetition steps increase. This appears to be due to noisy

6456

Figure 5: Performance of Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct with permuted contexts of MuSiQue during repetitions. The red
line denotes the context in the worst order, and the purple line denotes the context in the best order.

Figure 6: Performance of Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct for contexts with various noise powers in the synthetic task.

information being repeated in the context, negatively affecting its reasoning ability. We provide a
detailed analysis of this in Section 4.3.
4.3 Analysis
Does CoRe really guide the model along the
better reasoning chain? We conduct additional
analysis to investigate whether the performance improvement from CoRe is indeed related to the order
of the documents. Similar to the experiments described in Section 3.1, we permute the order of the
documents in the context across all possible combinations and measure the model’s performance for
each permuted context. Specifically, for 200 k-hop
samples from MuSiQue, we construct a context
with five documents, including the k supporting
documents and some random 5 − k noisy documents assigned to each sample. As a result, each
sample has 120 permuted contexts, and we sort the
performance of each context from the worst order
to the best order, based on pθ (a | Q, C, I). Figure
5 shows the results for Llama. We plot the worst

order with a red line and the best with a purple line.
For other cases, we plot their performance with the
line of a continuous gradient of colors from red
to purple, corresponding to the performance range
from the worst to the best case. In other words,
the closer the color is to red in the rainbow spectrum, the lower pθ (a | Q, C, I) is, and the closer
to purple, the higher pθ (a | Q, C, I) is. Across
all query types, we find compelling evidence that
CoRe contributes to performance improvements
in terms of document order: The closer the context is to the worst order case, the greater the
performance improvement from repetition. Additionally, we observe that as the number of hops increases, performance improves progressively with
iterative repetition, indicating that multiple repetitions are more effective when the required reasoning steps increase. Appendix D shows the results
for other LLMs in this analysis.
Impact of noisy documents We further analyze
the impact of noisy documents on CoRe. In the synthetic task, we measure accuracy by increasing the
number of repetitions in cases where the number of
lists is 6, 3, and 1, respectively. Here, the decrease
in the number of lists means a reduction in the proportion of information unrelated to the search target.
Figure 6 shows the results of this analysis. Considering that the length of the context decreases as the
number of lists handled in the context decreases,
we perform more repetitions in cases with fewer
lists. As a result, we confirm that as the proportion
of noisy information within the context decreases,
the performance degradation caused by excessive
repetition is reduced. In particular, when there is no
noisy information, performance did not decrease
even with a large number of repetitions. Since noisy
information adversely affects model reasoning at

6457

Methods
RAG
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
IRCoT
+ Dec.
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
+ CoRe & Dec.

2-hop
12.88
17.04
23.67
29.03
37.65
36.62

3-hop
8.06
12.44
10.64
11.78
19.35
17.87

4-hop
6.70
9.07
4.33
6.62
8.90
11.52

Table 2: F1 results for retrieve-and-reason tasks in
MuSiQue. Dec. refers to Decompose method.

Figure 7: Performance of LLMs for various positions
of the supporting document. The solid line represents
CoRe, and the dotted line represents the baseline.

high repetition counts, exploring the valid number
of repetitions required for model reasoning could
be an interesting future work based on our findings.

5

Further Studies

5.1 Robustness to Positional Bias
We analyze the absolute positional bias in the context based on the position of supporting documents.
Here, positional bias refers to the phenomenon
where the QA performance of an LLM varies depending on the position of the supporting documents within the context, known as the "lost-in-themiddle" problem (Liu et al., 2023). We concatenate
k supporting documents in MuSiQue and measure
the F1 scores of the baseline without repetition
(k̂ = 1) and CoRe (k̂ = 2) while shifting the position of the documents from 0 to 18 by increments of
2. As shown in 7, we observe that the performance
gap between the baseline and CoRe increases as
the position of the supporting documents moves
toward the middle. Particularly for Llama (blue
line) and Phi (green line), while the baseline suffers from the "lost-in-the-middle" problem, CoRe
demonstrates robustness against positional bias, exhibiting minimal performance variation depending
on the position of the supporting documents. Based
on these results, we demonstrate that CoRe is a solution to mitigate the "lost-in-the-middle" problem.
5.2 Enhancement in Retrieve-and-Reason
We evaluate the effectiveness of CoRe (k̂ = 2) in
a retrieve-and-reason task, which closely mirrors
real-world scenarios. We utilize Contriever (Izacard

et al., 2021) as the retriever model, constructing the
context with up to 100 retrieved documents from
MuSiQue samples. We use Llama for this experiment. We first assess CoRe’s performance with (1)
the standard RAG, which directly retrieves the top
100 relevant documents to form the context. We
also evaluate CoRe with two additional methods:
(2) IRCoT (Trivedi et al., 2023), where retrieval is
performed sequentially during the CoT reasoning
process, and (3) Decompose, where the query is
decomposed into sub-queries, and reasoning is conducted by deriving intermediate answers for each
sub-query (Press et al., 2023). As shown in Table
2, CoRe significantly improves performance across
all methods, demonstrating its effectiveness when
integrated into various retrieval-based reasoning
approaches. Appendix E presents the experimental
details of this section.
Additionally, we report the performance of CoRe
when applied in Chain-of-Thought (CoT) scenarios
in Appendix D. We also conduct various ablation
studies in Appendix F.

6

Conclusion

In this work, we introduce the misordered context
problem, which critically impacts LLMs’ multihop reasoning capabilities. Formalizing this problem regarding context augmentation, we propose
a simple yet highly effective solution: the CoRe
method, which optimally arranges contiguous reasoning segments within the context to enhance
performance. We demonstrate the contributions of
our approach across various multi-hop reasoning
benchmarks, including synthetic tasks, and elucidate its effectiveness through further studies. Our
work highlights a key issue crucial for future discussions in multi-hop reasoning tasks with LLMs.
Furthermore, we believe CoRe could provide meaningful insights for research on the test-time scaling
of LLMs that perform complex reasoning.

6458

Limitations
The context repetition method proposed in this
work increases the input context length by repeating the prompt’s contents, which introduces additional costs for memory and time during inference.
While the time cost is kept manageable due to the
efficient KV caching mechanism, future research
could explore ways to repeat only the core contents
of the context, thereby minimizing unnecessary expansion. Moreover, as discussed in the analysis
section, it is crucial to address the performance
degradation caused by noisy documents when repeating the context. A promising avenue for future
work would be to combine the inherent capabilities of LLMs with techniques that minimize the
influence of noisy documents while maximizing
the effectiveness of context repetition. Overall, our
work lays the foundational groundwork for addressing the misordered context problem through context augmentation, and future studies could build
upon this foundation to further refine and extend
the approach.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant
funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.
2022R1A3B1077720), Institute of Information &
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) [NO.RS-2021-II211343, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Seoul National University)], the BK21 FOUR program of
the Education and Research Program for Future
ICT Pioneers, Seoul National University, Samsung
Electronics Co., Ltd (IO240311-09242-01), and a
grant from the Yang Young Foundation.

References
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan,
Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla,
Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. 2024. Phi-3 technical report: A highly
capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.14219.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1877–1901.

Xinyun Chen, Ryan Andrew Chi, Xuezhi Wang, and
Denny Zhou. 2024. Premise order matters in reasoning with large language models. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning.
Florin Cuconasu, Giovanni Trappolini, Federico Siciliano, Simone Filice, Cesare Campagnano, Yoelle
Maarek, Nicola Tonellotto, and Fabrizio Silvestri.
2024. The power of noise: Redefining retrieval for
rag systems. In Proceedings of the 47th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2024. ACM.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21783.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia,
Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and Haofen
Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented generation for
large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10997.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multihop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of
reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 6609–6625, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and
Edouard Grave. 2021. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas
Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane DwivediYu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard
Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval
augmented language models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 24(251):1–43.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023a. Mistral
7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun,
Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie
Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023b. Active retrieval
augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7969–7992, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao
Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. Decomposed prompting: A modular
approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.02406.

6459

Jaehyung Kim, Jaehyun Nam, Sangwoo Mo, Jongjin
Park, Sang-Woo Lee, Minjoon Seo, Jung-Woo Ha,
and Jinwoo Shin. 2024. Sure: Summarizing retrievals
using answer candidates for open-domain qa of llms.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:22199–
22213.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech
Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. 2022. Internetaugmented language models through few-shot
prompting for open-domain question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05115.
Jinhyuk Lee, Anthony Chen, Zhuyun Dai, Dheeru Dua,
Devendra Singh Sachan, Michael Boratko, Yi Luan,
Sébastien MR Arnold, Vincent Perot, Siddharth
Dalmia, et al. 2024. Can long-context language models subsume retrieval, rag, sql, and more? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.13121.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474.
Yanyang Li, Shuo Liang, Michael Lyu, and Liwei Wang.
2024. Making long-context language models better
multi-hop reasoners. In Proceedings of the 62nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2462–
2475.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
Liang. 2023. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Preprint, arXiv:2307.03172.
Christopher Malon and Bing Bai. 2020. Generating followup questions for interpretable multi-hop question
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12344.
Vaibhav Mavi, Anubhav Jangra, Adam Jatowt, et al.
2024. Multi-hop question answering. Foundations
and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 17(5):457–
586.
Sewon Min, Victor Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Multi-hop reading comprehension through question decomposition and rescoring. In ACL.
OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-4o mini: advancing cost-efficient
intelligence.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.

2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–27744.
Pouya Pezeshkpour and Estevam Hruschka. 2024.
Large language models sensitivity to the order of options in multiple-choice questions. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2024, pages 2006–2017.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt,
Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and
narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5687–5711, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan
Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael Schärli,
and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large language models can
be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
31210–31227. PMLR.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Richard James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. 2024a. Replug: Retrievalaugmented black-box language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 8364–8377.
Zhengliang Shi, Shuo Zhang, Weiwei Sun, Shen Gao,
Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, and Zhaochun Ren.
2024b. Generate-then-ground in retrieval-augmented
generation for multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 7339–7353, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Mitchell Springer, Suhas Kotha, Daniel Fried,
Graham Neubig, and Aditi Raghunathan. 2024. Repetition improves language model embeddings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.15449.
Qwen Team. 2024. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation
models.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval

6460

with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledgeintensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of
the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 10014–10037, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:24824–24837.
Siye Wu, Jian Xie, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Kai
Zhang, and Yanghua Xiao. 2024. How easily do
irrelevant inputs skew the responses of large language
models? In First Conference on Language Modeling.

Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang,
Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen
Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. 2023. A
survey of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.18223.
Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and
Minlie Huang. 2024. Large language models are not
robust multiple choice selectors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
Wenhu Chen Ziyan Jiang, Xueguang Ma. 2024. Longrag: Enhancing retrieval-augmented generation with
long-context llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15319.

Zheyang Xiong, Vasilis Papageorgiou, Kangwook Lee,
and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. 2024. From artificial
needles to real haystacks: Improving retrieval capabilities in llms by finetuning on synthetic data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.19292.
Shicheng Xu, Liang Pang, Huawei Shen, Xueqi Cheng,
and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. Search-in-the-chain: Interactively enhancing large language models with search
for knowledge-intensive tasks. In Proceedings of the
ACM on Web Conference 2024, pages 1362–1373.
Xiaohan Xu, Chongyang Tao, Tao Shen, Can Xu,
Hongbo Xu, Guodong Long, and Jian-guang Lou.
2023. Re-reading improves reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06275.
Vikas Yadav, Steven Bethard, and Mihai Surdeanu. 2019.
Quick and (not so) dirty: Unsupervised selection
of justification sentences for multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
2578–2589.
Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling.
2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset
for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP).
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Wenhao Yu, Hongming Zhang, Xiaoman Pan, Kaixin
Ma, Hongwei Wang, and Dong Yu. 2023. Chain-ofnote: Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09210.

6461

A

D

Proof of Theorem 1

We will prove this theorem by demonstrating that
(k)
the augmented context frep (C), constructed by repeating the original context C k times, inherently
arranges the supporting documents in the order
specified by the permutation σ.
By applying the augmentation function, we obtain:
(k)

frep (C) = (n0 , dτ (1) , n1 , · · · , dτ (k) , nk ) ⊕
|
{z
}
1st repetition

(n0 , dτ (1) , n1 , · · · , dτ (k) , nk ) ⊕
|
{z
}
2nd repetition

···

(n0 , dτ (1) , n1 , · · · , dτ (k) , nk ) .
{z
}
|
k-th repetition

We can extract the supporting documents in the
order specified by σ by selecting the dσ(i) from the
i-th repetition. All other documents in each repetition of C (i.e., all dj where j ̸= σ(i) in the i-th
repetition and all nj ) are considered noisy documents. This means they are treated as n′j in the
(k)

definition of Cσ . The augmented context frep (C)
can thus be viewed as:
(k)

frep (C) = (n′0 , dσ(1) , n′1 , dσ(2) , . . . , dσ(k) , n′k ),
where each dσ(i) is extracted from the i-th repetition, and all n′j are noisy documents. This directly
matches the structure of some Cσ ∈ Cσ , satisfying:
(k)

frep (C) ∈ Cσ .
Since σ was arbitrary, this holds for any permutation σ.

B

C

In this section, we describe additional experimental
results not reported in the main text. Specifically,
we extend the analysis from Section 4.3, where the
impact of applying CoRe to each permuted context
was only evaluated on Llama, to additional models,
including Mistral, Qwen, and Phi. Figures 8 to 10
present the analysis results for each model. Similar to the findings for Llama, we observe that the
performance improvement from CoRe increases as
the context be close to the worst-order cases for all
models. This further solidifies that the performance
gains of CoRe stem from augmenting the original
context into an optimal context. Meanwhile, we
notice a slight performance drop in contexts close
to the best order as repetition increases, particularly for models like Mistral and Phi. This trend is
more pronounced compared to Llama and can be
interpreted as a result of these models being less
capable of handling noisy documents.
Additionally, we evaluate the performance of
CoRe when applied to Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
reasoning in multi-hop QA tasks. As shown in Table 6, CoRe consistently leads to significant improvements, particularly in bridge and compositional question types, aligning with the main results presented earlier. In the case of GPT-4o-mini,
some performance metrics remain stable, which
we attribute to an observed trade-off: while recall
increases, precision decreases. This suggests that
when CoT reasoning is combined with CoRe, the
model is better at deducing the correct answer, but
the length of the generated response tends to increase, resulting in a slight drop in precision. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that CoRe can
meaningfully enhance performance even in the context of CoT reasoning. Table 7 shows the prompt
template of CoRe for CoT reasoning in the multihop QA tasks.

E

Data Statistics

Table 3 shows the statistics of the evaluation sets
in the multi-hop QA tasks conducted in the main
experiments.

Prompts for Experiments

Table 4 and 5 show the prompt template of CoRe
for the multi-hop QA tasks and the synthetic task
conducted in the section 4, respectively.

Additional Results

Experimental Details of
Retrieve-and-Reason Task

In this section, we provide the experimental details of the retrieve-and-reasoning task conducted
in Section 5.2. The retrieval database consists of
101,962 documents, constructed by ensuring no
overlap between the documents assigned to each
sample from the MuSiQue training and validation
sets. The evaluation set is built by randomly sampling 480 samples from the MuSiQue validation
set, comprising 249 2-hop samples, 149 3-hop sam-

6462

ples, and 82 4-hop samples.
The standard RAG approach retrieves the top
100 documents at once, which are then used as
the context for prompting the LLM. IRCoT operates by having the LLM perform Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) reasoning while generating sentences. After
each sentence is generated, the top 10 documents
related to the generated sentence are retrieved and
concatenated with the previously retrieved documents, updating the context. If the LLM concludes
its reasoning with an expression such as "So the answer is," the subsequent output is taken as the final
answer. If the context update process exceeds 10
iterations without reaching a conclusion, the entire
output generated during the CoT process is considered the final answer. This setup follows the one
described in Trivedi et al. 2023. When IRCoT is
combined with CoRe, after each CoT sentence is
generated, the context of the retrieved documents
and previously generated CoT responses is repeated
in the prompt.
In the question decomposition setting, LLM is
instructed to decompose the query into several subqueries before answering the query. Once the subqueries are generated, the LLM is directed to perform step-by-step reasoning by following each subquery, with the process guided by an instruction
that ensures the sub-queries are considered during
the answering phase. This setting aligns with the
prompt design of Press et al. (2023). Table 8 shows
the prompt template of query decomposition.

F

Ablation Studies

F.1 Prompt Style Ablation
In this section, we investigate the impact of changing the position where CoRe is applied within the
prompt. Specifically, we conduct an ablation study
for the role where CoRe is applied in the chat
template prompt. In our default setup, CoRe is
applied through the assistant role, where the context is repeated in the responses generated by the
assistant. However, we also consider an alternative setup where the context is repeated in the user
role. We evaluate the performance of Llama, Mistral, Qwen, and Phi on 2WikiMultihopQA using F1
scores. k̂ = 2 for CoRe in this study.
The results, presented in Table 9, reveal that in
some cases, applying CoRe in the user role leads
to significant performance improvements. Notably,
except for Qwen, the other models show substantial gains when applying CoRe in the user role.

For instance, Mistral demonstrates a 17-point improvement in compositional-type questions and a
15-point gain in comparison-type questions. Phi
also shows an 18-point increase in F1 score on
bridge-comparison-type questions. We hypothesize
that these improvements are due to the task being framed as a single-turn chat when CoRe is
applied in the user role. Some models are predominantly tuned on single-turn chat tasks rather than
multi-turn interactions, making it easier for them
to reason when CoRe is applied in the user role. By
adapting the CoRe methodology to align with the
model’s training environment, we would create a
more familiar reasoning context, leading to larger
performance gains. Table 11 shows the prompt template of CoRe applied in the user role position
within the prompt.
F.2

Repetition Style Ablation

Additionally, we conduct an ablation study to explore the effects of modifying the repeated context.
Specifically, we examine 4 cases where the content
of the context is altered during repetition: (1) each
documents are paraphrased, (2) each documents
are summarized, (3) the order of the documents
is shuffled randomly, and (4) the order of the documents is reversed. We evaluate the performance
of each of these cases. The experiments are conducted on 2WikiMultihopQA using Llama, where
the paraphrasing and summarizing are directly performed by Llama responsible for reasoning. k̂ = 2
for CoRe in this study.
Table 10 presents the results for each case when
repetition is applied once. Interestingly, in comparison tasks, all ablation settings yield higher performance than the baseline setting, which involves
simply repeating the context as is. This suggests
that the process of recognizing the same content in
different forms is particularly beneficial for comparison tasks. For the cases of shuffling and reversing the order of documents, performance improvements are observed in three out of four types,
excluding inference. This indicates that varying
the order of documents during repetition enables
the model to consider a wider range of reasoning
chains. As discussed in Section 4.3, future research
could explore applying CoRe while reducing the
noise power within the context, and actively modifying the form of the context, as in this study, could
be another potential direction to consider. Table 12
and 13 show the prompt template of paraphrasing
and summarizing, respectively.

6463

G

Computational Environment

For the main experiments, we utilize NVIDIA
A40 GPU. For the experiments for the retrieveand-reason task, we utilize NVIDIA H100 80GB
HBM3 GPU. All the models except GPT-4o-mini
in our work are from huggingface. We utilize
GPT-4o-mini through OpenAI API package.

H

Licenses

HotpotQA, 2WikiMultihopQA, and MuSiQue are
licensed under the CC BY-SA 4.0, CC-BY-4.0,
and Apache-2.0 licenses, respectively. Llama-3.1,
Mistral, Qwen, Phi, and GPT-4o-mini are licensed
under the Llama 3.1 COMMUNITY LICENSE,
Apache-2.0, Apache-2.0, MIT, and OpenAI.

I

Usage of AI Writing Assistant

This paper benefited from linguistic support provided by the AI assistant ChatGPT-4o, which contributed by offering paraphrasing and enhancing the
original content. No other assistance was sought
beyond these services.

6464

Figure 8: Performance of Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 with permuted contexts of MuSiQue during repetitions. The red
line denotes the context in the worst order, and the purple line denotes the context in the best order.

Figure 9: Performance of Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct with permuted contexts of MuSiQue during repetitions. The red line
denotes the context in the worst order, and the purple line denotes the context in the best order.

Figure 10: Performance of Phi-3.5-mini-instruct with permuted contexts of MuSiQue during repetitions. The red
line denotes the context in the worst order, and the purple line denotes the context in the best order.

6465

Datasets
# of samples
Context length

HotpotQA
Comparison Bridge
1000
1000
869.17
977.33

Compositional
500
701.15

2WikiMultihopQA
Comparison Inference
500
500
567.84
772.21

Bridge-Comparison
500
593.87

2-hop
1252
1694.4

MuSiQue
3-hop
4-hop
760
405
1827.92 1778.8

Table 3: Data statistics of evaluation sets for each dataset of multi-hop QA tasks in the main experiments. Context
length denotes the mean number of words included in the context of each type of sample.

[User role]
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
Answer the question based on the given documents. Respond only the answer within a few words
after ’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Sure. Before answering the question, I’ll reconsider the question and the documents once more.
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
[User role]
Now answer the question based on the documents. Respond only the answer within a few words after
’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Answer:

Table 4: Prompt template of CoRe used in main experiments for the multi-hop QA tasks.

6466

[User role]
Information:
All the {k} lists described in the below contain exactly {n} elements.
In the list 0, {lists[0][0]} is positioned immediately before {lists[0][1]}.
...
In the list {k}, {lists[k][0]} is positioned immediately before {lists[k][1]}.
...
In the list 0, {lists[0][n-2]} is positioned immediately before {lists[0][n-1]}.
...
In the list {k}, {lists[k][n-2]} is positioned immediately before {lists[k][n-1]}.
Question: What is the first element of the list that contains {lists[0][n-1]}?
Answer the question based on the given information. Respond only the answer without any explanation
after ’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Sure. Before answering the question, I’ll reconsider the question and the documents {t} times
more.
Information:
{Information}
Question: {Question}
...
(repeat t-times)
[User role]
Now answer the question based on the documents. Respond only the answer without any explanation
after ’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Answer:

Table 5: Prompt template of CoRe used in main experiments for the synthetic task.

Models
Llama-3.1-8B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
Mistral-7B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
Qwen2.5-7B
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
Phi-3.5-mini
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)
GPT-4o-mini
+ CoRe (k̂ = 2)

HotpotQA
Comparison Bridge
54.07
67.74
53.07
71.93
32.19
43.68
36.04
52.74
65.93
68.01
65.67
72.03
44.58
59.76
46.23
62.4
59.29
71.74
57.68
74.04

Compositional
52.36
53.36
27.31
37.37
49.29
51.09
44.92
46.01
55.75
54.93

2WikiMultihopQA
Comparison Inference Bridge-Comparison
70.46
61.21
42.23
72.12
63.54
77.55
39.74
37.22
26.47
45.94
48.51
53.47
84.83
55.37
77.38
85.59
59.97
83.96
81.44
48.48
81.14
83.26
51.23
82.83
78.91
76.44
88.46
77.53
77.65
88.38

2-hop
49.71
51.94
21.87
25.99
45.33
49.94
28.53
34.98
55.06
56.8

MusiQue
3-hop 4-hop
43.03 31.28
44.7 37.98
14.18 9.41
15.96 11.22
38.18 36.53
45.21 40.25
23.39 19.49
31.24 30.61
49.68 41.84
51.41 44.35

Table 6: Chain-of-Thought results of F1 score in the multi-hop QA tasks. All models are instruction-tuned LLMs.

6467

Chain-of-Thought reasoning
[User role]
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
Answer the question based on the given documents.
[Assistant role]
Sure. Before answering the question, I’ll reconsider the question and the documents once more.
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
[User role]
Now answer the question based on the documents.
[Assistant role]
Let’s think step by step.
Extract short answer from CoT response
(After same prompt of user-assistant-user as above prompt for chain-of-thought reasoning ...)
[Assistant role]
Let’s think step by step. {CoT response}
[User role]
Respond only the answer in a few words after ’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Answer:

Table 7: Prompt template of CoRe used in Chain-of-Thought reasoning for the multi-hop QA tasks.

[User role]
Decompose the following question into several sub-questions.
Question: {Question}
[Assistant role]
1.

Table 8: Prompt template of query decomposition for the retrieve-and-reason task.

6468

Models
Llama-3.1-8B
+ CoRe in assistant
+ CoRe in user
Mistral-7B
+ CoRe in assistant
+ CoRe in user
Qwen2.5-7B
+ CoRe in assistant
+ CoRe in user
Phi-3.5-mini
+ CoRe in assistant
+ CoRe in user

Compositional
38.1
48.15
53.45
18.82
27.78
44.07
41.36
54.2
54.05
27.7
37.64
42.56

Comparison
55.77
58.13
69.36
32.9
35.67
50.7
65.47
70.3
69.73
45.26
50.92
54.89

Inference
40.75
44.81
47.59
29.77
36.39
39.64
37.26
42.4
41.64
27
32.34
34.51

Bridge-Comparison
34.86
65.11
68.76
15.43
29.09
25.29
39.45
64.54
68.3
35.19
36.71
54.37

Table 9: Results in the ablation study about the position of context repetition

Methods
Baseline (CoRe)
Paraphrase
Summary
Shuffle
Reverse

Compositional
48.15
48.23
48.44
51.25
50.65

Comparison
58.13
61.17
61.68
63.4
63.35

Inference
44.81
42.32
40.35
43.33
42.9

Bridge-Comparison
65.11
57.19
64.79
65.97
67.11

Table 10: Results for Llama in the ablation study about the content of repeated contexts.

[User role]
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
Answer the question based on the given documents. Respond only the answer within a few words
after ’Answer:’.
Look again the input prompt:
Question: {Question}
Documents:
Document [0] {Document 0}
Document [1] {Document 1}
...
Document [N] {Document N}
Answer the question based on the given documents. Respond only the answer within a few words
after ’Answer:’.
[Assistant role]
Answer:

Table 11: Prompt template of CoRe applied in the user role position.

6469

[System role]
You are a professional paraphraser. Your task is to paraphrase the given text based on the below
instructions. Follow the instructions to achieve the desired output.
- Objective: Rewrite the text more thoroughly, changing both vocabulary and sentence structure
while preserving the original meaning.
- Instructions: (MOST IMPORTANT) Use your own style for natural paraphrase
Introduce new expressions, alter sentence structure, and rearrange clauses.
Use synonyms and change the form of words (e.g., verbs to nouns, or active to passive voice).
Retain the original message but express it in a noticeably different way.
- Example:
Original: "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog."
Paraphrase: "With swift movements, the brown fox leaps over the dog lying lazily."
# Format of the paraphrasing task
- Original: The original text.
- Paraphrase: The paraphrased version of the text based on the above guideline. Provide the
output text immediately.
[User role]
Paraphrase the original text below.
Original: {input text}
[Assistant role]
Paraphrase:

Table 12: Prompt template of paraphrasing for the ablation study.

[System role]
ummarize the following text while ensuring that no key information, factual accuracy, or essential
meaning is lost. Follow these guidelines:
- Maintain Key Details: All critical points, facts, and arguments from the original text must be
preserved.
- Conciseness: The summary should be significantly shorter than the original text while capturing
its essence. - Clarity and Precision: Use clear, professional language. Avoid vague phrasing.
- No Alteration of Meaning: Do not add, alter, or infer information that is not present in the
original text.
Please follow below pattern of example. Provide the output text immediately.
- Example:
Original Text: The rapid development of artificial intelligence over the last decade has led to
significant breakthroughs in various fields, including healthcare, finance, and transportation.
However, these advancements also raise concerns about data privacy, job displacement, and the
ethical use of AI technologies.
Summary: AI advancements in healthcare, finance, and transportation have been substantial, though
concerns about data privacy, job displacement, and ethical issues have emerged.
[User role]
Summarize the following text below.
Original Text: {input text}
[Assistant role]
Summary:

Table 13: Prompt template of summarizing for the ablation study.

6470

